---
title: Verified AVL Trees in Haskell and Agda
tags: Haskell, Agda
bibliography: AVL.bib
---

I've been writing a lot of Agda recently, and had the occasion to write a
[Fenwick tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fenwick_tree) that did some
rebalancing. I went with [AVL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AVL_tree)-style
rebalancing (rather than
[red-black](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red–black_tree) or [trees of bounded
balance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weight-balanced_tree)). I'd written
pretty full implementations of the other two before, and the Agda standard
library [@danielsson_agda_2018] has an implementation already that I was able to
use as a starting point. Also, apparently, AVL trees seem to perform better than
red-black trees in practice [@pfaff_performance_2004].

This post will be similar in style to Stephanie Weirich's talk
[-@weirich_depending_2014], which compares an Agda implementation of verified
red-black trees to a Haskell one. When there's two columns of code side-by-side,
the left-hand side is Haskell, the right Agda.

The method of constructing the ordering proof is taken from "How to Keep Your
Neighbours in Order" [-@mcbride_how_2014] by Conor McBride; the structural
proofs are somewhat inspired by the implementation in the Agda standard library,
but are mainly my own.

# Height

AVL trees are more strictly balanced than red-black trees: the height of
neighboring subtrees can differ by at most one. To store the height, we will
start as every dependently-typed program does: with Peano numbers.

<style>
.column {
    float: left;
    width: 50%;
}
.row:after {
    content: "";
    display: table;
    clear: both;
}
</style>
<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  Haskell

  ```haskell
  data N = Z | S N
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  Agda
  
  ```agda
  data ℕ : Set where
    zero : ℕ
    suc  : ℕ → ℕ
  ```
  </div>
</div>

The trees will be balanced one of three possible ways: left-heavy, right-heavy,
or even. We can represent these three cases in a GADT in the case of Haskell,
or an indexed datatype in the case of Agda:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  data Balance :: N -> N -> N -> Type where
        L :: Balance (S n) n    (S n)
        O :: Balance  n    n     n
        R :: Balance  n   (S n) (S n)
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  data ⟨_⊔_⟩≡_ : ℕ → ℕ → ℕ → Set where
    ◿  : ∀ {n} → ⟨ suc  n ⊔      n ⟩≡ suc  n
    ▽  : ∀ {n} → ⟨      n ⊔      n ⟩≡      n
    ◺  : ∀ {n} → ⟨      n ⊔ suc  n ⟩≡ suc  n
  ```
  </div>
</div>

Those unfamiliar with Agda might be a little intimidated by the mixfix operator
in the balance definition: we're using it here because the type can be seen of a
proof that:

$$max(x,y) = z$$

Or, using the $\sqcup$ operator:

$$(x \sqcup y) = z$$

We'll use this proof in the tree itself, as we'll need to know the maximum of
the height of a node's two subtrees to find the height of the node. Before we do
that, we'll need a couple helper functions for manipulating the balance:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  balr :: Balance x y z -> Balance z x z
  balr L = O
  balr O = O
  balr R = L

  ball :: Balance x y z -> Balance y z z
  ball L = R
  ball O = O
  ball R = O
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  ⃕ : ∀ {x y z} → ⟨ x ⊔ y ⟩≡ z → ⟨ z ⊔ x ⟩≡ z
  ⃕  ◿  = ▽
  ⃕  ▽  = ▽
  ⃕  ◺  = ◿

  ⃔ : ∀ {x y z} → ⟨ x ⊔ y ⟩≡ z → ⟨ y ⊔ z ⟩≡ z
  ⃔  ◿  = ◺
  ⃔  ▽  = ▽
  ⃔  ◺  = ▽
  ```
  </div>
</div>

# Ordering

Along with the verification of the structure of the tree, we will also want to
verify that its contents are ordered correctly. Unfortunately, this property is
a little out of reach for Haskell, but it's 100% doable in Agda. First, we'll
need a way to describe orders on a data type. In Haskell, we might write:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  class Ord a where
    (==) :: a -> a -> Bool
    (<)  :: a -> a -> Bool
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  $$***$$ 
  </div>
</div>

That `Bool`{.haskell} throws away any information gained in the comparison,
though: we want to supply a proof with the result of the comparison. First,
equality:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  infix 4 ==
  data (==) :: Type
            -> Type
            -> Type where
    Refl :: x == x
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  infix 4 _≡_
  data _≡_ {a} {A : Set a}
           (x : A) 
           : A → Set a where
    refl : x ≡ x
  ```
  </div>
</div>

This is one of the many ways to describe equality in Agda. It's a  type with
only one constructor, and it can only be constructed when its two arguments are
the same. When we pattern match on the constructor, then, we're given a proof
that whatever things those arguments refer to must be the same.

Next, we need to describe an order. For this, we'll need two types: the empty
type, and the unit type.

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  data Void :: Type where
  data Unit :: Type where Unit :: Unit
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  data ⊥ : Set where
  data ⊤ : Set where ⟨⟩ : ⊤
  ```
  </div>
</div>

These are kind of like type-level Bools, with one extra, powerful addition: they
keep their proof after construction. Because `⊥`{.agda} has no constructors, if
someone tells you they're going to give you one, you can be pretty sure they're
lying. How do we use this? Well, first, on the numbers:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  type family (n :: N) < (m :: N)
      :: Type where
    x   < Z   = Void
    Z   < S y = Unit
    S x < S y = x < y
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  _ℕ<_ : ℕ → ℕ → Set
  x     ℕ< zero  = ⊥
  zero  ℕ< suc y = ⊤
  suc x ℕ< suc y = x ℕ< y
  ```
  </div>
</div>

Therefore, if we ask for something of type `x ℕ< y`{.agda} (for some `x` and
`y`), we know that it only exists when `x` really is less than `y` (according to
the definition above).

For our actual code, we'll parameterize the whole thing over some abstract key
type. We'll do this using a module (a feature recently added to Haskell, as it
happens). That might look something like this:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">

  ```haskell
  signature Key where
    import Data.Kind
    data Key
    type family (n :: Key) < (m :: Key)
      :: Type

  module AVL where
    import Key
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  module AVL
    {k r} (Key : Set k)
    {_<_ : Rel Key r}
    (isStrictTotalOrder
     : IsStrictTotalOrder _≡_ _<_)
    where

    open IsStrictTotalOrder isStrictTotalOrder
  ```
  </div>
</div>

(the `k`{.agda} and `r`{.agda} here, as well as the `Lift`{.agda}ing noise
below, are to do with Agda's universe system, which I'll try explain in a bit)

Now, the trick for the ordering is to keep a proof that two neighboring values
are ordered correctly in the tree at each leaf (as there's a leaf between every
pair of nodes, this is exactly the place you *should* store such a proof). A
problem arises with the extremal leaves in the tree (leftmost and rightmost):
each leaf is missing one neighboring value, so how can it store a proof of
order? The solution is to affix two elements to our key type which we define as
the greatest and least elements of the set.

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  
  
  data Bound = LB | IB Key | UB
  
  

  infix 4 <:

  type family (x :: Bound) <: (y :: Bound)
      :: Type where
    LB   <: LB   = Void
    LB   <: UB   = Unit
    LB   <: IB _ = Unit
    UB   <: _    = Void
    IB _ <: LB   = Void
    IB _ <: UB   = Unit
    IB x <: IB y = x < y
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  infix 5 [_]

  data [∙] : Set k where
    ⌊⌋ ⌈⌉ : [∙]
    [_]   : (k : Key) → [∙]

  infix 4 _[<]_

  _[<]_ : [∙] → [∙] → Set r
  ⌊⌋     [<] ⌊⌋    = Lift r ⊥
  ⌊⌋     [<] ⌈⌉    = Lift r ⊤
  ⌊⌋     [<] [ _ ] = Lift r ⊤
  ⌈⌉     [<] _     = Lift r ⊥
  [ _ ]  [<] ⌊⌋    = Lift r ⊥
  [ _ ]  [<] ⌈⌉    = Lift r ⊤
  [ x ]  [<] [ y ] = x < y
  ```
  </div>
</div>

# The Tree Type

After all that, we can get bring back Haskell into the story, and define or tree
types:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell

  data Tree :: N
            -> Type
            -> Type
            -> Type where
    Leaf :: Tree Z k v
    Node :: k
         -> v
         -> Balance lh rh h
         -> Tree lh k v
         -> Tree rh k v
         -> Tree (S h) k v
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  data Tree {v} 
            (V : Key → Set v)
            (l u : [∙]) : ℕ →
            Set (k ⊔ v ⊔ r) where
    leaf  : (l<u : l [<] u) → Tree V l u 0
    node  : ∀  {h lh rh}
               (k : Key)
               (v : V k)
               (bl : ⟨ lh ⊔ rh ⟩≡ h)
               (lk : Tree V l [ k ] lh)
               (ku : Tree V [ k ] u rh) →
               Tree V l u (suc h)
  ```
  </div>
</div>

The two definitions are similar, but have a few obvious differences. The Agda
version stores the ordering proof at the leaves, as well as the bounds as
indices. Its
[*universe*](https://pigworker.wordpress.com/2015/01/09/universe-hierarchies/)
is also different: briefly, universes are one of the ways to avoid Russell's
paradox when you're dealing with dependent types.

In normal, standard Haskell, we think of types as things that describe values
(how quaint!). When you've got a list, everything in the list has the same type,
and that is good and right.

These days, though, we're not so constrained:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  infixr 5 :-
  data List xs where
    Nil  :: List '[]
    (:-) :: x
         -> List xs
         -> List (x : xs)
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  infixr 5 _፦_
  data List′ : List Set → Set where
    nil : List′ []
    _፦_ : ∀ {x xs}
        → x 
        → List′ xs 
        → List′ (x ∷ xs)
  ```
  </div>
</div>

This can quite happily store elements of different types:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  example :: List [Bool, String, Integer]
  example = True :- "true" :- 1 :- Nil
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  example : List′ (Bool ∷ String ∷ ℕ ∷ [])
  example = true ፦ "true" ፦ 1 ፦ nil
  ```
  </div>
</div>

And look at that bizarre-looking list on the wrong side of "`::`{.haskell}"!
Types aren't just describing values, they're acting like values themselves. What
type does `[Bool, String, Integer]`{.haskell} even have, anyway? Why,
`[Type]`{.haskell} of course!

So we see that types can be put in lists, and types have types: the natural
question then is:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  Type :: ???
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  Set : ???
  ```
  </div>
</div>

And this is where Haskell and Agda diverge: in Haskell, we say `Type ::
Type`{.haskell} (as the old extension `TypeInType`{.haskell} implied), and
that's that. From a certain point of view, we've opened the door to Russell's
paradox (we've allowed a set to be a member of itself). This isn't an issue in
Haskell, though, as the type-level language was already inconsistent.

Agda goes another way, saying that `Set`{.agda} (Agda's equivalent for
`Type`{.haskell}) has the type `Set₁`{.agda}, and `Set₁`{.agda} has the type
`Set₂`{.agda}, and so on[^dir]. These different sets are called "universes" and
their numbers "levels". When we write `k ⊔ v ⊔ r`{.agda}, we're saying we want
to take the greatest universe level from those three possible levels: the level
of the key, the value, and the relation, respectively.

[^dir]: My phrasing is maybe a little confusing here. When `Set`{.haskell} "has
    the type" `Set₁`{.agda} it means that `Set`{.haskell} is *in* `Set₁`{.agda},
    not the other way around.

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  Type :: Type
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  Set : Set₁
  ```
  </div>
</div>
# Rotations

AVL trees maintain their invariants through relatively simple rotations. We'll
start with the right rotation, which fixes an imbalance of two on the left.
Because the size of the tree returned might change, we'll need to wrap it in a datatype:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  data (++?) :: (N -> Type)
             -> (N -> Type)
             where
    Stay :: t n     -> t ++? n
    Incr :: t (S n) -> t ++? n
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda

  _1?+⟨_⟩ : ∀ {𝓁} (T : ℕ → Set 𝓁) → ℕ → Set 𝓁
  T 1?+⟨ n ⟩ = ∃[ inc? ] T (if inc?
                              then suc n
                              else n)

  pattern 0+_ tr = false , tr
  pattern 1+_ tr = true  , tr
  ```
  </div>
</div>

We could actually have the Agda definition be the same as Haskell's, it doesn't
make much difference. I'm mainly using it here to demonstrate dependent pairs in
Agda. The first member of the pair is just a boolean (increased in height/not
increased in height). The second member is a tree whose height *depends* on the
actual value of the boolean. The `∃`{.agda} business is just a fancy syntax; it
also waggles its eyebrows at the way a (dependent) pair of type `(x , y)` means
"There exists an x such that y".

Using this, we can write the type for right-rotation:

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  rotr :: k
       -> v
       -> Tree (S (S rh)) k v
       -> Tree rh k v
       -> Tree k v ++? S (S rh)
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  rotʳ : ∀ {lb ub rh v} {V : Key → Set v}
       → (k : Key)
       → V k
       → Tree V lb [ k ] (suc (suc rh))
       → Tree V [ k ] ub rh
       → Tree V lb ub 1?+⟨ suc (suc rh) ⟩
  ```
  </div>
</div>

There are two possible cases, single rotation:

<style>
.tree {
  margin: auto;
  width: 30%;
}
</style>
<div class="tree">
```haskell
   ┌a       ┌a
 ┌y┤       y┤
 │ └b --->  │ ┌b
x┤          └x┤
 └c           └c
```
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  rotr x xv (Node y yv L a b) c =
    Stay (Node y yv O a (Node x xv O b c))
  rotr x xv (Node y yv O a b) c =
    Incr (Node y yv R a (Node x xv L b c))
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  rotʳ x xv (node y yv ◿ a b) c =
    0+ (node y yv ▽ a (node x xv ▽  b c))
  rotʳ x xv (node y yv ▽ a b) c =
    1+ (node y yv ◺ a (node x xv ◿  b c))
  ```
  </div>
</div>

And double:

<div class="tree">
```haskell
   ┌a           ┌a
 ┌y┤          ┌y┤
 │ │ ┌b       │ └b
 │ └z┤  ---> z┤
 │   └c       │ ┌c
x┤            └x┤
 └d             └d
```
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  rotr x xv (Node y yv R a 
              (Node z zv bl b c)) d =
    Stay (Node z zv O 
           (Node y yv (balr bl) a b)
           (Node x xv (ball bl) c d))
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  rotʳ x xv (node y yv ◺  a
              (node z zv bl b c)) d =
    0+ (node z zv ▽
         (node y yv (⃕ bl) a b)
         (node x xv (⃔ bl) c d))
  ```
  </div>
</div>

I won't bore you with left-rotation: suffice to say, it's the opposite of
right-rotation.

# Insertion

Finally, the main event: insertion. Once the above functions have all been
defined, it's not very difficult, as it happens: by and large, the types guide
you to the right answer. Of course, this is only after we decided to use the
pivotal pragmatism and balance approach.

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  ```haskell
  insertWith
      :: Ord k
      => (v -> v -> v)
      -> k
      -> v
      -> Tree h k v
      -> Tree k v ++? h
  insertWith _ v vc Leaf =
    Incr (Node v vc O Leaf Leaf)
  insertWith f v vc (Node k kc bl tl tr) =
    case compare v k of
      LT ->
        case insertWith f v vc tl of
          Stay tl' ->
            Stay (Node k kc bl tl' tr)
          Incr tl' -> case bl of
            L -> rotr k kc tl' tr
            O -> Incr (Node k kc L tl' tr)
            R -> Stay (Node k kc O tl' tr)
      EQ ->
        Stay (Node v (f vc kc) bl tl tr)
      GT ->
        case insertWith f v vc tr of
          Stay tr' ->
            Stay (Node k kc bl tl tr')
          Incr tr' -> case bl of
            L -> Stay (Node k kc O tl tr')
            O -> Incr (Node k kc R tl tr')
            R -> rotl k kc tl tr'
  ```
  </div>
  <div class="column">
  ```agda
  insert : ∀ {l u h v}
             {V : Key → Set v}
             (k : Key)
         → V k
         → (V k → V k → V k)
         → Tree V l u h
         → l < k < u
         → Tree V l u 1?+⟨ h ⟩
  insert v vc f (leaf l<u) (l , u) =
    1+ (node v vc ▽ (leaf l) (leaf u))
  insert v vc f (node k kc bl tl tr) prf
    with compare v k
  insert v vc f (node k kc bl tl tr) (l , _)
      | tri< a _ _ with insert v vc f tl (l , a)
  ... | 0+ tl′ = 0+ (node k kc bl tl′ tr)
  ... | 1+ tl′ with bl
  ... | ◿ = rotʳ k kc tl′ tr
  ... | ▽ = 1+ (node k kc  ◿  tl′ tr)
  ... | ◺ = 0+ (node k kc  ▽  tl′ tr)
  insert v vc f (node k kc bl tl tr) _
      | tri≈ _ refl _ =
          0+ (node k (f vc kc) bl tl tr)
  insert v vc f (node k kc bl tl tr) (_ , u)
      | tri> _ _ c with insert v vc f tr (c , u)
  ... | 0+ tr′ = 0+ (node k kc bl tl tr′)
  ... | 1+ tr′ with bl
  ... | ◿ = 0+ (node k kc ▽ tl tr′)
  ... | ▽ = 1+ (node k kc ◺ tl tr′)
  ... | ◺ = rotˡ k kc tl tr′
  ```
  </div>
</div>


# Conclusion

Overall, I've been enjoying programming in Agda. The things I liked and didn't
like surprised me:

Editor Support

:   Is excellent. I use [spacemacs](http://spacemacs.org), and the whole thing
    worked pretty seamlessly. Proof search and auto was maybe not as powerful as
    Idris', although that might be down to lack of experience (note---as I write
    this, I see you can enable case-splitting in proof search, so it looks like
    I was right about my lack of experience). In many ways, it was much better
    than Haskell's editor support: personally, I have never managed to get
    case-splitting to work in my Haskell setup, never mind some of the fancier
    features that you get in Agda.
    
    It's worth noting that my experience with Idris is similar: maybe it's
    something about dependent types?
    
    Of course, I missed lots of extra tools, like linters, code formatters,
    etc., but the tight integration with the compiler was so useful it more than
    made up for it.
    
    Also, I'd implore anyone who's had trouble with emacs before to give
    [spacemacs](http://spacemacs.org) a go. It works well out-of-the-box, and
    has a system for keybinding discovery that *actually works*.

Documentation

:   Pretty good, considering. There are some missing parts
    ([rewriting](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.5.4.1/language/rewriting.html)
    and
    [telescopes](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.5.4.1/language/telescopes.html)
    are both stubs on the documentation site), but there seemed to be more fully
    worked-out examples available online for different concepts when I needed to
    figure them out.

Now, the thing about a lot of these complaints/commendations (*especially* with
regards to tooling and personal setups) is that people tend to be pretty bad
about evaluating how difficult finicky tasks like editor setups are. Once you've
gotten the hang of some of this stuff, you forget that you ever didn't. Agda is
the second dependently-typed language I've really gone for a deepish dive on,
and I've been using spacemacs for a while, so YMMV.

One area of the language itself that I would have liked to see more on was
irrelevance. Looking back at the definition of the tree type, in the Haskell
version there's no singleton storing the height (the balance type stores all the
information we need), which means that it definitely doesn't exist at runtime.
As I understand it, that implies that the type should be irrelevant in the
equivalent Agda. However, when I actually mark it as irrelevant, everything
works fine, except that missing cases warnings start showing up. I couldn't
figure out why: Haskell was able to infer full case coverage without the index,
after all. Equality proof erasure, also: is it safe? Consistent?

All in all, I'd encourage more Haskellers to give Agda a try. It's fun,
interesting, and $\mathcal{Unicode}$!

# Further Reading

No "deletion is left as an exercise to the reader" here, no sir! Fuller
implementations of both the Haskell and Agda versions of the code here are
available: first, a pdf of the Agda code with lovely colours is
[here](/pdfs/AVL.pdf). The accompanying repository is
[here](https://github.com/oisdk/agda-avl), and the equivalent for the Haskell
code is [here](https://github.com/oisdk/verified-avl). Of course, if you would
rather read something by someone who knows what they're talking about, please
see the

# References
