---
title: Fun with Combinators
tags: Combinators
bibliography: Combinator Calculi.bib
---

<script src="../code/ski/script.js"></script>
<style>
input[type=text] {
    border:0;
    outline:0;
    font-size: 11px;
    font-family: menlo, monospace;
    width: 90%;
}
input[type=text]:focus {
    outline:none!important;
}
input[type=text]:invalid {
    color: red;
    box-shadow: none;
}
</style>

There are a bunch of "minimal" computational models out there: Turing machines,
lambda calculus, PowerPoint [@wildenhainTuringCompletenessMS2017], etc.
These are radically simple languages which are nonetheless Turing complete, so
theoretically "as powerful" as each other.
Of those, lambda calculus is without question my favourite to actually write
programs in: it's the one which is closest to crawling out of the [Turing
tarpit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_tarpit).

In terms of implementation, though, it is *far* from simple.
Lambda calculus has *variables*, which introduce huge complexity into the
interpreter: especially if you want to do any kind of formal reasoning about
programs, this complexity is a problem.
We might want to reach for something even lower-level than lambda calculus: this
is where combinator calculi come in.

You may have heard of SKI combinator calculus: it's the "simplest" of the
calculi, but it's not actually very easy to understand, and it's absolute murder
to try use.
So we're going to start with `BCKW`, a more obscure calculus, actually invented by
Haskell Curry.

There are 4 combinators in `BCKW`: `B`, `C`, `K`, and `W` (shocking, I know).
You can think about these combinators as functions which manipulate the
beginning of strings:

```
Bxyz ~> x(yz)
Cxyz ~> xzy
Kxy  ~> x
Wxy  ~> xyy
```

Let's work with some examples to get a sense for how these combinators work.

Upper case letters are combinators, lower-case are variables.
Yes, yes, I know I said that combinator calculi didn't need variables, and it
doesn't!
I'm just using them here to explain how each of the combinators work.
If you really want to be pedantic you can think of the lower case letters as
notational placeholders meaning "any given combinator".
They won't exist in any actual programs we write.

The simplest combinator is `K`: it's actually equivalent to the  `const`
function from Haskell.
It discards its second argument, and returns the first.
If you give a combinator more arguments than it usually accepts, you just keep
the extra arguments in the output:

```
Kxyz ~> xz
```

`W` is the next combinator: it *duplicates* its second argument.

```
Wxy ~> xyy
```

We always start from the *left*, applying the rule for the left-most combinator
first.

```
WKxyz ~> Kxxyz ~> xyz
KWxyz ~> Wyz   ~> yzz
```

Next we have `C`: this is equivalent to the Haskell function `flip`.
It swaps the second and third arguments:

```
Cxyz ~> xzy
```

Here's a small little evaluator for expressions which use `C`, `K`, and `W`.
You can edit the expression, and press enter to step through it.

<p id="CKW"></p><script>
repl(
  { input_id: "CKW"
  , output_lines: 3
  , initial_expr: "WKCxyz"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.C, Comb.K, Comb.W]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>

The last combinator introduces parentheses, and it's equivalent to function
composition.

```
Bxyz ~> x(yz)
```

You can write parentheses yourself: implicitly, all expressions are left-associative.
That means that the following are all equal:

```
xyz = (xy)z = (x)yz = ((x)y)z
```

But `xyz` is *not* equal to, say, `x(yz)`.

And here's a puzzle to start flexing your combinator skills: one of the
combinators in SKI combinator calculus is `I`, which is the identity function.

```
Ix ~> x
```

Try write an expression which functions the same way as `I`, using only the
`BCKW` combinators.
Use the following evaluator to try and figure out how to do it: write an
expression after `λ>` which functions the same as `I`.

<p id="BCKWtoI"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "BCKWtoI"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "x"
  , expect: "x" 
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.B, Comb.C, Comb.K, Comb.W]
  }
); </script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>

<details><summary>Answer</summary>
`CK` followed by any combinator will do the trick.
So `CKB`, `CKK`, `CKC`, etc.

```
I = CKC
```
</details>

# Why Not Simpler Combinators?

Each of the combinators we've defined so far work a little weird: they seem to
skip over their first argument, and work on their second.
Indeed, there is another, equivalent combinator calculus which doesn't have this
peculiarity:

```
Bxyz ~> x(yz)
Axy  ~> y
Mx   ~> xx
Txy  ~> yx
```

`B` stays the same in this calculus, but the rest of the combinators get
switched out for seemingly simpler versions.
`K` goes to `A`^[If you want to look up these combinators elsewhere, this is the only one
you won't be able to find: it's much less common than `K`, and where I have
found it people just call it `K`, so I had to pick a different letter to
distinguish it]:

```
Axy ~> y
Kxy ~> x
```

Which isn't a huge change.
It's the other two where we see the real difference.
`W` has been swapped out for `M`:

```
Wxy ~> xyy
Mx  ~> xx
```

As you can see `W` basically does the same thing as `M`, but while passing
through its first argument.
The difference between `T` and `C` is similar:

```
Cxyz ~> xzy
Txy  ~> yx
```

So, first of all, it is pretty simple to show that `BCKW` contains all of the
`BAMT` combinators.
Try find a way to write `T` using only `BCKW` combinators (hint: you might want
to use your previous answer for writing `I` using `BCKW`).

<p id="BCKWtoT"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "BCKWtoT"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "xy"
  , expect: "yx"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.B, Comb.C, Comb.K, Comb.W]
  }
); </script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>

<details><summary>Answer</summary>
So in fact all of the changed `BAMT` combinators can be encoded using `BCKW` by
putting `I` (or `CKC` or what have you) after the corresponding `BCKW` combinator.
In other words:
```
T = CI = C(CKC)
A = KI = K(CKC)
M = WI = W(CKC)
```
</details>

It's pretty easy to go from `BCKW` to `BAMT`, then.
However, it's *extremely* difficult to go the other way.
Here, try to write `K` in terms of `BAMT` (this is quite difficult, do not
expect to get it!):

<p id="BAMTtoK"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "BAMTtoK"
  , output_lines: 5
  , vars: "xy"
  , expect: "x"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.B, Comb.A, Comb.M, Comb.T]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>

<details><summary>Answer</summary>
Either of the following would work:

```
B(TA)(BBT)
B(B(TA)B)T
```
</details>

So this is why we will stick to `BCKW` for the time being: `BAMT` is just too
painful to use.

# Linear Types and Combinators

One of the things `BCKW` has over `SKI` is that each combinator represents a
concrete capability.
`K` and `W` especially: without these combinators, we can neither duplicate nor
discard variables.
This makes the languages without one or both of these interesting (albeit not
Turing-complete).

If we say that we can't use `W`, we know that the will not duplicate any input.
In fact, encoded appropriately, we know that the program can only decrease its
size through execution.
The `BCK` system is in fact an encoding of *affine* logic, which is all the rage
nowadays.
Rust uses affine types to guarantee memory safety: by preventing duplication of
references, you can know that whenever you're looking at a variable you're free
to modify it, or destroy it if necessary (obviously Rust is a bit more complex
than what I've described here, but `BCK` is indeed the fundamental basis for the
system in the same way that `SK` can be the basis for any programming language).

If we remove `K` as well we have a *linear* language.
This is even more restrictive, but is also quite actively researched at the
moment: linear types have been used to construct languages for differential
privacy, for instance.

There's one small issue with `BC`: it doesn't (strictly speaking) have an
equivalent to `I`.
You can write an expression which is *close*, but it will only actually compute
when applied to at least 3 arguments.
See if you can find it.

<p id="BCtoI"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "BCtoI"
  , output_lines: 4
  , vars: "xyz"
  , expect: "xyz"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.B, Comb.C]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>
```
BCC
```
</details>

Usually we add `I`, though, to give us `BCI`.

# The Minimal Combinators: S and K

`S` is the only combinator we haven't seen yet.
It's kind of a combination of `B`, `C`, and `W`:

```
Sxyz ~> xz(yz)
```

It does parenthesising, reordering, *and* duplication.
This allows it to be powerful to be Turing complete only with the addition of
`K`.
Try first to construct `I` given only `S` and `K`:

<p id="SKtoI"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "SKtoI"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "x"
  , expect: "x"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.S, Comb.K]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>
`SK` followed by any combinator will suffice.
```
I = SKK = SKS
```
</details>

And now construct `S` from `BCKW`:

<p id="BCKWtoS"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "BCKWtoS"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "xyz"
  , expect: "xz(yz)"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.B, Comb.C, Comb.K, Comb.W]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>
```
S = B(BW)(BBC) = B(B(BW)C)(BB)
```

</details>

Of course, to show that `SK` is universal we'd need to show that it contains one
of the other universal systems.
We won't do that exhaustively here, but first just try to figure out `B` and `W`:

<p id="SKItoB"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "SKItoB"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "xyz"
  , expect: "x(yz)"
  , normal: true
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.S, Comb.K, Comb.I]
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>
```
B = S(KS)K
```
</details>

<p id="SKItoW"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "SKItoW"
  , output_lines: 3
  , vars: "xy"
  , expect: "xyy"
  , allowed_combos: [Comb.S, Comb.K, Comb.I]
  , normal: true
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>
```
S = SS(SK) = SS(KI)
```
</details>

# Recursion

The next task is to encode the `Y` combinator.
This is a combinator that evaluates to the following:

```
Yf ~> f(Yf)
```

As you can see, it encodes *recursion*.
Like the `fix` function in Haskell, this combinator allows us to do recursion
without explicit self-reference.
And, of course, we can define this combinator using the combinators we've seen
before, since our language is Turing complete.
One encoding is `BM(CBM)`:

<p id="Y"></p><script>
repl(
  { input_id: "Y"
  , output_lines: 5
  , initial_expr: "BM(CBM)f"
  , normal: true
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>

As you can see, `BM(CBM)`, when applied to `f`, yields `f(M(CBMf))`, which is
equivalent to `f(BM(CBM)f)` (the `B` just hasn't been applied inside the `f`).
So this is indeed a proper recursion combinator.

# Encoding Numbers

Let's try doing a little bit of programming with these combinators now.

In the lambada calculus, to encode numbers we often use the *church* numerals:
that's what we're going to do here, too.
A church numeral representing some number $n$ is a function which takes two
arguments, and applies the first argument to the second $n$ times.
Here are some church numerals in Haskell:

```
zero :: (a -> a) -> a -> a
zero f x = x

one :: (a -> a) -> a -> a
one f x = f x

two :: (a -> a) -> a -> a
two f x = f (f x)

three :: (a -> a) -> a -> a
three f x = f (f (f x))
```

Encoding these numerals in combinators is a little more difficult.
Zero and one are obvious: they are `A` and `I`, respectively.
Try to figure out two and three:

<p id="two"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "two"
  , output_lines: 2
  , normal: true
  , vars: "fx"
  , expect: "f(fx)"
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>`WB`</details>

<p id="three"></p><script>
puzzle(
  { input_id: "three"
  , output_lines: 2
  , normal: true
  , vars: "fx"
  , expect: "f(f(fx))"
  }
);
</script><noscript>Turn on JavaScript to allow interactive evaluation</noscript>
<details><summary>Answer</summary>`SB(WB)`</details>

It turns out that it's pretty easy to encode numbers in a relatively small
amount of space, using a binary encoding.
First, multiplication on Church numerals is simply composition: so that's `B` on
our combinators.
We already have 2 defined, so the next thing we need for a binary encoding is a
successor function.
And we know what *that* is, from the answer to 3!

This means we can encode normal number in $\mathcal{O}(\log n)$ space (although it still
takes linear time to evaluate).
The following repl allows for numbers:

<p id="numbers"></p><script>
repl({
  input_id: "numbers",
  normal: true,
  allow_numbers: true,
  initial_expr: "5fx"
});
</script>

We could take up even less space if we allowed for non-normal forms.
4, for instance, could be encoded like so:

```
M(WB)
```

But we generally prefer to keep our encodings in normal form: otherwise there's
some extra evaluation we have to pay for when we go to use them.

# Encoding Lambda Terms as Combinators

Once upon a time SKI combinators were used as a target for functional compilers:
Miranda, Haskell's precursor, compiled down to a set of combinators which
included `SKI`.
Nowadays, Haskell is compiled to the "spineless tagless G-machine": its
compilation technique took over from combinators in the late 80s, and has been
the dominant form since.
Apparently the reason is that, on the current architecture of most computers,
combinator-based compilation targets just aren't fast enough.
They generate too much garbage: as a result, switching to the STG yielded about
a 40% speedup.

A lot of this information comes from two talks, by the way:

* [An Introduction to Combinator Compilers and Graph Reduction
  Machines](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GawiQQCn3bk), by [David
  Graunke](https://twitter.com/graunked?lang=en)
  [-@graunkeIntroductionCombinatorCompilers2016], which goes through a
  high-level history and explanation of combinator compilers and why we switched
  away from them.
  A very interesting tidbit in this talk was that some people started making
  custom hardware to handle combinator calculi a little better.
  Even more interesting is the fact that these days we have FPGAs all over the
  place, so maybe combinator compilers are ripe for reintroduction?
* [Combinators Revisited](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhj_tUMwTe0), by
  [Edward Kmett](https://twitter.com/kmett) [-@kmettCombinatorsRevisited2018],
  which goes through a little more of the details of the problems with
  combinator compilers, and mentions some of the places in which we're
  tantalisingly close to making combinator compilation work.
  
So compilation to combinators was once upon a time an extremely active area of
research, but it has since fallen by the wayside a little because our current
hardware is unable to evaluate it efficiently.
What this means for us, though, is that there's a large body of work on how to
compile lambda terms to combinators!

We use the following basic combinator set for compilation: `SKIBC`.
`S` is really the most important one here: of course we only need it and `K`,
but we use `I` because it dramatically simplifies the expressions we generate,
and we use `B` and `C` because they are special cases of `S`, as we'll see in a
second.
The translation works like so:


```
\x. e1 e2 -> S (\x. e1) (\x. e2)
\x. x     -> I
\x. e     -> K e
```

The translation works bottom-up.
We're only interested in removing the lambdas: combinator calculus does have
application, after all, so there's nothing we need to do in that case.
For that reason, the algorithm is often called "abstraction elimination", and
it's the one the [pointfree.io](pointfree.io) uses to automatically pointfree
Haskell expressions.

There are three forms of abstraction: abstraction into an expression which is an
application, abstraction which returns its argument, and abstraction which
returns something other than its argument.
In the first case, we use `S` to pass the argument down each branch of the
abstraction.
In the second, we just use `I`.
And in the third case, we use `K` to just ignore the argument.
We won't ever get `\x. \y. e`, since the algorithm works bottom-up, so the `\y.
e` is eliminated before looking at the `\x. \y. e`.

`B` and `C` work like special cases of `S`: when we pass `x` down both branches
of the application in the first case, sometimes that work is unnecessary.
Sometimes one of the branches doesn't use the passed variable: in this case, we
use `B` or `C`, depending on which branch ignores the variable.

```
\x. e1 e2, x ∉ e1 -> B e1 (\x. e2)
\x. e1 e2, x ∉ e2 -> C (\x. e1) e2
```

There is one issue with this approach: it produces combinator expressions which
are of order $\mathcal{O}(n^3)$ larger than the corresponding lambda expression.
With some tricks (like our usage of `C` and `B`) we can get that down to
$\mathcal{O}(n^2)$, but that's still a pretty unpleasant size increase.

The issue is that we're basically passing the arguments as a singly-linked list,
where naive access is $\mathcal{O(n^2)}$, and more sophisticated access is
$\mathcal{O}(n)$.

Oleg Kiselyov wrote a [paper](http://okmij.org/ftp/tagless-final/ski.pdf)
[-@kiselyovSKISemantically2018] on getting this down to $\mathcal{O}(n)$, with
some memoisation.
There's also a blog post [@lynnBenLynnOnline2018], describing how to get that
conversion without memoisation in $\mathcal{O}(n \log n)$ time, and an online
implementation [here](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~blynn/lambda/logski.html).

# Conclusion

That's all for this post!
I'll probably write more about combinators in the future: they're an extremely
interesting subject, and a lot of fun as puzzles to mess around with.
One thing that I haven't mentioned is the connection between combinators and
concatenative languages: it turns out that these two things are pretty much the
same thing!
Maybe I'll look at it in a future post.

---
